---
layout: post
title: Graphs
tags: [data-structures]
---

## Definitions

__graph__ a data structure formed by a set of vertices and edges connecting those vertices.
__directed graph__ a graph whose edges have directions.
__path__ a sequence of vertices connected by edges. The length of a path is the number of its edges. 
__cycle__ a path which has at least one edge and whose first and last vertices are the same vertice.
__acyclic graph__ a graph without any cycle.
__connected graph__ a graph where there is a path between every pair of vertices in the graph
__tree__ an acyclic connected graph.
__spanning tree of a graph__ a tree with all the vertices of the graph
__forest__ a disjoint set of trees
__strongly connected vertices__ vertices are mutually reachable from each other

<!--break-->

## Representations

There are two common representations of a graph:

	- Adjacency-list: Each vertex is associated with an array of its adjacent vertices. 
	This can be implemented either by making a vertex manage its own array or the graph to manage the arrays of all vertices via a two dimensional array.
	- Adjacency-matrix: The graph maintains a matrix where the entry `(u,v)` has positive value if vertices `u` and `v` are adjacent to each other.

The former representation is more flexible as it allows to include custom data into the edges and is more memory-efficient than the latter as it only requires `O(V + E)` memory whereas the latter always needs `O(V^2)` memory. 
This memory efficiency is because the adjacency-list representation only needs to allocate memory for existant edges. However, the latter representation is simpler to implement and it also facilitates the check if there is an edge between any two vertices in constant time. 
Therefore, it really depends on the requirements to choose the appropriate representation.

## Breadth-first search (BFS)

A graph search is an algorithm used to visit the vertices of a graph by following the graph edges in a particular order.

BFS is a graph search algorithm that first tries to visit all the vertices at the same distance from a given source vertex and then continues to visit the other nodes at farther distances.
In other words, given a source vertex `s`, this algorithm visits all the vertices at distance `k` from `s` and then those at distance `k + 1` and so on.

One special property of BFS is that it gives the shortest paths between `s` and its reachable vertices.
In other words, if `v` is reachable from `s`, then the path from `s` to `v` found by BFS is the shortest path.

This algorithm takes `O(V + E)` time in the worst case.

## Depth-first search (DFS)

DFS is also a graph search algorithm but differs from BFS in the way it follows the graph edges.
In contrast to BFS, this algorithm does not try to visit all the nodes at the same distance from the given source vertex, but instead it tries to follow the edges leading to the farthest node from the source vertex that has not been discovered yet as soon as it sees any such edge. 
In other words, at each distance `k` from `s`, this algorithm visits only one node and then follows the edges going out from that node to go farther from `s`. When there is no such edge, it backtracks to the farthest node from `s` that has not been visited yet and then repeats the process.

Like BFS, this algorithm takes `O(V + E)` time in the worst case.

## Topological sort

A topological sort of a directed acylic graph is an ordering of the graph vertices such that, if there exists an edge `(u,v)` in the graph, the vertex `u` must come before `v` in the ordering.

A topological sort can be established by using DFS. When a vertex is visited in DFS, all of its adjacents must already be visited. Thus, the topological sort is the reverse of the order in which the vertices are visited.

## Source code

- [github/graphs](https://github.com/khanhpdt/datastructures-algorithms/tree/master/data-structures/src/main/java/org/khanhpdt/playgrounds/datastructures/graphs)
- [github/graph-algorithms](https://github.com/khanhpdt/datastructures-algorithms/tree/master/algorithms/src/main/java/org/khanhpdt/playgrounds/algorithms/graphs)

## References

[1] [Introduction to algorithms](http://www.amazon.com/Introduction-Algorithms-3rd-MIT-Press/dp/0262033844/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1461439930&sr=1-1&keywords=introduction+to+algorithms)

[2] [Algorithms](http://www.amazon.com/Algorithms-4th-Robert-Sedgewick/dp/032157351X/ref=sr_1_2?ie=UTF8&qid=1461440135&sr=8-2&keywords=algorithms)
