---
layout: post
title: Arrays
tags: [data-structures, java]
---

## Arrays in general

An array is a fixed-size data structure where items can be accessed by their positions in the array.

An array is called _ragged_ or _jagged_ array if it is an array of arrays of different sizes.

Arrays offer fast random access, because the memory is allocated for an array such that the addresses of its elements can be quickly computed [4]. The main disadvantage of using arrays is their fixed size. Once an array is created, its size cannot be changed.

<!--break-->

| Operation | Performance |
| :------------- | :-------------: |
| Insert       | `O(1)`      |
| Search       | `O(N)` |

## Arrays in Java

Arrays are first-class objects.

{% highlight java %}
// a variable is created, but the array is not yet created
int[] a;

// An array object is actually created in the heap. The array variable points to
// that object, which holds references to the array elements.
a = new int[] {1, 2, 3, 4};

// shortcut to initialize arrays
int[b] = {1, 2, 3, 4};
{% endhighlight %}

The differences between arrays and other containers are [5]:

- Arrays offer a faster random access (as it is well-known for)
- But array size is fixed
- Arrays can contain either object references or primitive values, while containers can only hold object references.
- Containers offer more utilities to work on them.

It is a compile-time error if the component type of the array being initialized is not reifiable [6].

{% highlight java %}
// compile error
List<Integer>[] a = new List<Integer>[] {Arrays.asList(1), Arrays.asList(2)};

// a workaround to still guarantee type safe when using the array
List<Integer>[] a = (List<Integer>[]) new List[] {Arrays.asList(1), Arrays.asList(2)};
{% endhighlight %}

Arrays subject to _covariant_ subtyping, i.e., `S[]` is a subtype of `T[]` if `S` is a subtype of `T` [7]. This is in contrast to the _invariant_ subtyping used for the Java containers. Invariant subtyping means, for example, `List<S>` is not a subtype of `List<T>` even if `S` is a subtype of `T`.

Every array is associated with a `Class` object, and arrays with the same component type are associated with the same `Class` object [6].
{% highlight java %}
int[] a1 = new int[]{1, 2};
int[] b1 = new int[]{3, 4};
assert a1.getClass() == b1.getClass();

Integer[] a2 = new Integer[]{1, 2};
Integer[] b2 = new Integer[]{3, 4};
assert a2.getClass() == b2.getClass();
{% endhighlight %}

## Code samples

- [github/ArrayTest](https://github.com/khanhpdt/java-playground/blob/master/src/test/java/org/khanhpdt/javaplayground/datastructures/arrays/ArrayTest.java)

## References

[1] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Array_data_structure
[2] http://www.algolist.net/Data_structures/Array
[3] https://en.wikiversity.org/wiki/Data_Structures_and_Algorithms/Arrays,_Lists_and_Vectors
[4] http://cslibrary.stanford.edu/103/LinkedListBasics.pdf
[5] Book "Thinking in Java, 4th edition"
[6] https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jls/se8/html/jls-10.html
[7] Book "Java Generics and Collections"
[8] Book "Data structures and algorithms in Java"
