---
layout: post
title: Strings
tags: [java]
---

## Immutability

String instances have immutable values, i.e., their values cannot be changed after created.

## String pool

String pool is one of the special constant pools maintained by the JVM. This pool keeps track of all the string literals used in the application.

When a new `String` instance is created by the string literal, e.g., `String s = "hello";`, the JVM looks into the pool to see if the same string literal has been created. If found, the JVM assigns the shared `String` object for the literal to the new instance. Otherwise, it records the new literal into the pool, creates a new `String` object, and assigns the new object to the new instance. This process is also called string interning. It can also be enforced by invoking the `String#intern()` method.

If a `String` instance is created by the `new` operator, e.g., `String s = new String("hello");`, a new `String` object will always be created.

## String concatenation

- The overloading `+` vs. `StringBuilder`

  Under the hood, the compiler automatically creates a `StringBuilder` when the overloading `+` is used to concatenate strings. But it is not smart enough to reuse the `StringBuilder`, for example, when the concatenation happens inside a loop, in which case it creates a new `StringBuilder` for each iteration. This is the main reason why `StringBuilder` is preferred over the overloading `+` operator.

- `StringBuilder` vs. `StringBuffer`

  - Provide same API
  - `StringBuffer` guarantees thread-safety by synchronizing all of its operations, while `StringBuilder` does not.
  - `StringBuilder` offers a better performance because no synchronization is involved.

# References

[1] Thinking in Java
[2] OCA/OCP Java® SE 7 Programmer I & II Study Guide (Exams 1Z0-803 & 1Z0-804)
[3] [http://java-performance.info/string-intern-in-java-6-7-8/](http://java-performance.info/string-intern-in-java-6-7-8/)
[4] [http://javatechniques.com/blog/string-equality-and-interning/](http://javatechniques.com/blog/string-equality-and-interning/)
